Add files via upload (#27223)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/monitors/guide/notification-message-best-practices.md

Notification messages are the bridge between your monitoring system and the people who can fix the problem. If the message is unclear or poorly written, it can cause confusion, slow down response times, or even result in unresolved issues. On the other hand, a clear and actionable message helps your team quickly understand what's wrong and what to do next.

This guide will show you how to write better notification messages. You'll learn the key principles of effective communication, common mistakes to avoid, and tips for crafting messages that get results. Whether you're a product manager, developer, or operations professional, this guide will help you create notifications that keep your systems reliable and your team efficient.

# Notification Configuration

When configuring your monitors, one required step is to configure the notification.  
{{< img src="/monitors/guide/notification_message_best_practices/monitor_notification_message.png" alt="Monitor notification message configuration" style="width:100%;" >}}

There are several fields to fill to configure it:

* Monitor Name, which is also the Notification title.  

> * Monitor Message, which is the body of the notification.

Reviewer: I moved this content up a few lines

You have 2 types of variables:

* Conditional variables that use "*if-else"* logic to tweak the context of the message depending on some conditions, such as the state of the monitor.  
* Template variables to enrich your monitor notifications with contextual information.

Variables are especially important in a **Multi-Alert** monitor. When it triggers, you want to know which group triggered the monitor, and that's where variables are handy.

Example:  
Let's say you are monitoring the CPU usage of your containers, grouped by host.  
{{< img src="/monitors/guide/notification_message_best_practices/query_parameters.png" alt="Example monitor query of container.cpu.usage metric averaged by host" style="width:100%;" >}}

A great variable to use would be **{{host.name}}** to know the exact host that  triggered the alert.

### Conditional variables

These variables allow you to tailor the notification message based on your needs and use case by building some branch logic.

For example, if you'd like to get notified only if a certain group triggers, you can use {{\#is\_exact\_match}} variable.  

> Example:  
> `{{#is_exact_match "role.name" "db"}}`  
>   `` This displays if the host triggering the alert contains `db` ``  
>   `in the role name. @db-team@company.com`  
> `{{/is_exact_match}}`

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```  
{{#is_exact_match "role.name" "db"}}
  # Content displays if the host triggering the alert contains `db` in the role name. @db-team@company.com 
{{/is_exact_match}}`
````

Reviewer: Is the @db-team@company.com listed inside to show an example of db role.name?

Author: yes 👍

> That is also a way to notify different people/groups depending on the group that triggered the alert.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use conditional variables to notify different people/groups depending on the group that triggered the alert.  
```

Example:  

> `{{#is_exact_match "role.name" "db"}}`  
>   `` This displays if the host triggering the alert contains `db` ``  
>   `in the role name. @db-team@company.com`  
> `{{/is_exact_match}}`  

Reviewer: Is this a copy paste?

```suggestion
```

Author: I think we can change the previous one to is_match and keep this one (since it's on purpose with the second part of the example)

> `{{#is_exact_match "role.name" "network"}}`  
>   `` This displays if the host triggering the alert contains `network` ``  
>   `in the role name. @network-team@company.com`  
> `{{/is_exact_match}}`

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```
{{#is_exact_match "role.name" "network"}}
 # The content displays if the host triggering the alert contains `network` in the role name. @network-team@company.com
{{/is_exact_match}}
```
````

> You can receive a notification as well if the group that triggered the alert contains a specific string.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can receive a notification if the group that triggered the alert contains a specific string.  
```

> Example:  
> `{{#is_match "datacenter.name" "us"}}`  
>   ``This displays if the region triggering the alert contains `us` (e.g. us1, us3, …). @us.datacenter@company.com``  
> `{{/is_match}}`

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```
{{#is_match "datacenter.name" "us"}}
  # The content displays if the region triggering the alert contains `us` (such as us1 or us3)@us.datacenter@company.com``  
{{/is_match}}
```
````

> For more information on how to use conditional variables, see the [documentation](https://docs.datadoghq.com/monitors/notify/variables/?tab=is_alert#conditional-variables). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more information and examples, see the [Conditional Variables][2] documentation. 
```

### Template variables

On the other hand, if you want to get the metadata that caused your monitor to alert, you can use template variables such as {{value}}, but also information related to the context of the alert.

Example:  
`The CPU for {{host.name}} (IP:{{host.ip}}) reached a critical value of {{value}}.`

> For more information on all the available template variables, see the [documentation](https://docs.datadoghq.com/monitors/notify/variables/?tab=is_alert#triggered-variables).

Reviewer: Should this link to https://docs.datadoghq.com/monitors/notify/variables/?tab=is_alert#template-variables ?

> On the other hand, if you want to get the metadata that caused your monitor to alert, you can use template variables such as {{value}}, but also information related to the context of the alert.
> 
> Example:  
> `The CPU for {{host.name}} (IP:{{host.ip}}) reached a critical value of {{value}}.`
> 
> For more information on all the available template variables, see the [documentation](https://docs.datadoghq.com/monitors/notify/variables/?tab=is_alert#triggered-variables).

Reviewer: ````suggestion
Add monitor template variables to access the metadata that caused your monitor to alert, such as {{value}}, but also information related to the context of the alert.

For example, if you want to see the hostname, IP and value of the monitor query:
```
The CPU for {{host.name}} (IP:{{host.ip}}) reached a critical value of {{value}}.
```

For the list of available template variables, see the [documentation][3].
````

> Another way to use template variables is by creating dynamic links and handles, that will automatically route your notifications to the right handle or with the right links.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can also use template variables to create dynamic links and handles that automatically route your notifications.  
```

> Example of handles:  
> `@slack-{{service.name}} There is an ongoing issue with {{service.name}}.`
> 
> Will result in the following when the group service:ad-server triggers:  
> `@slack-ad-server There is an ongoing issue with ad-server.`

Reviewer: ````suggestion
Example of handles:  
```
@slack-{{service.name}} There is an ongoing issue with {{service.name}}.
```

Results in the following when the group service:ad-server triggers:  
```
@slack-ad-server There is an ongoing issue with ad-server.
```
````

Example of links:  

> [`https://app.datadoghq.com/dash/integration/system_overview?tpl_var_scope=host:{{host.name`](https://app.datadoghq.com/dash/integration/system_overview?tpl_var_scope=host:{{host.name)`}}`

Reviewer: ````suggestion
```
[https://app.datadoghq.com/dash/integration/system_overview?tpl_var_scope=host:{{host.name](https://app.datadoghq.com/dash/integration/system_overview?tpl_var_scope=host:{{host.name)}}
```
````

> # Example

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Example of a notification message following best practices
```
